Week 07
=======

In Class
--------

- [Resources](Isit320-Resources.html)

## Update WebStorm

- Open WebStorm
- Choose **Help | Check for Updates**
- Follow the link to [https://www.jetbrains.com/webstorm/](https://www.jetbrains.com/webstorm/)
- Download web storm
- Close WebStorm

The following commands may differ if a new update of WebStorm has been released, but there should be enough information here to allow you proceed even if the commands differ because of updated version numbers.

Decompress:

```bash
tar xvfz ~/Downloads/WebStorm-11.0.0.tar.gz
```

Make sure Webstorm is not running. Now delete the old copy of WebStorm and put the new version in its place:

```bash
rm -r ~/bin/webstorm/
mv WebStorm-143.381.46/ ~/bin/webstorm
```

Restart webstorm:

- Do import settings
- Sign in again to your JetBrains Account if prompted to do so.

## Symbolic Links to node_modules {#symbolic-link}

There is a way to save space on your hard drive if you have a large number of very similar **node_modules** and bower **components** folders on your system. It involves creating one copy of these folders, and then linking to them from your projects. 

Go into one of the projects that uses most of the packages that we have been using in this course. For instance, go into any of the projects from Week07. Run **npm install** and **bower install**. 

If you do not have a **temp** directory in your home drive, create one:

	mkdir ~/temp

Now copy or move your folders into this temp directory. Here is the copy command:

```bash
cp -r node_modules ~/temp/.
cp -r public/components ~/temp/.
```

Or you can just move them there, which will free up space in your current project folder:

```bash
mv node_modules ~/temp/.
mv public/components ~/temp/.
```

Now go into another project. If there already are any existing packages, remove them to free up space:

```bash
rm -r node_modules
rm -r public/components
```

Now create symbolic links to the directories in your **temp** folder:

```bash
ln -s ~/temp/node_modules .
ln -s ~/temp/components public/.
```

As far as your project is concerned, the **node_modules** and **components** folders are now part of your project. They are actually in the temp directory, but the symbolic link makes them appear to be at two places at once:

- In your current project
- In the temp directory

I do this a lot, and it works very well. Once you start to understand what symbolic links are, you will find many uses for them. For instance, in your **~/bin** directory you can create symbolic links to scripts in **JsObjects**. Then, when you do **git pull** to get the latest versions of my scripts, they will automagically appear in your **~/bin** directory. This is because they only appear to be in your **~/bin** directory, they are really in **JsObjects**. There is a tiny symbolic link in the **~/bin** directory that points to the real copy of the file. Symbolic links don't make copies of your files, they just point at the other location. Thus you can have many symbolic links to your **~/temp/node_modules** folder while actually taking up only a small amount space on your drive.

Finally, you might want to make the code that creates the symbolic link a script, and put it in your **~/bin/directory**:

```bash
#! /bin/bash

ln -s ~/temp/node_modules .
ln -s ~/temp/components public/.
```

Save it as **~/bin/nm-links**. Make it executable

	chmod +x ~/bin/nm-links.sh

Now, you can create links to these folders at any time but running the **nm-links** script from the root of your project. (If the folders already exist, then the script will fail.)

## Free Space

Go to the root of your repository. Copy the Gruntfile.js and package.json file from Week07-Twitter.

```bash
cp Week07-Twitter/Gruntfile.js .
cp Week07-Twitter/package.json .
```

Edit **package.json** so it looks like this:

```javascript
{
  "name": "Week07-Twitter",
  "version": "0.0.0",
  "private": true,
  "scripts": {
    "start": "nodemon ./bin/www"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "grunt": "~0.4.2",
    "grunt-contrib-clean": "^0.6.0"
  }
}
```

And I also modified my **Gruntfile.js** so that it looks like this:

```javascript
module.exports = function(grunt) {
    'use strict';

    grunt.initConfig({

        pkg: '<json:package.json>',

        clean: {
            yourTarget: {
                src: ['**/node_modules/**', '**/components/**']
            }
        }
    });

    grunt.loadNpmTasks('grunt-contrib-clean');
};
```

And then run **npm install**. Finally, to delete the folders, type **grunt clean**.

In other words, in the root of your repository, there should now be the **Gruntfile.js** and **package.json** files shown above. In the root of your repository, run these commands:

```bash
npm install
grunt clean
```

You only need to run npm install once, of course. But the irony here is that this command will delete you **node_modules** folder, so you will have to run **npm install** again after you run this **grunt clean**.



###Grunt

- [Grunt on Elvenware](http://elvenware.com/charlie/development/web/UnitTests/Grunt.html)

###Unit Test Examples

You might also be interested in the tests for Crafty03. 

- [Mock Example](/charlie/development/web/JavaScript/Angular.html#basicMock)


###JSON from Server

Retrieve JSON from a server:

- [JSON Example](/charlie/development/web/JavaScript/Angular.html#jsonFromServer)

- [Example](https://github.com/charliecalvert/JsObjects/tree/master/JavaScript/Design/JsonFromServer)
- [Key File](https://github.com/charliecalvert/JsObjects/blob/master/JavaScript/Design/JsonFromServer/index.js)

