Week 10
=======

* [Resources](Isit320-Resources.html)

Protractor
----------

- <http://www.elvenware.com/charlie/development/web/UnitTests/Protractor.html>

Rubles
------

Grunt distributions
-------------------

Database
--------

- <https://support.mongolab.com/entries/20433053-Is-there-a-REST-API-for-MongoDB->

- <https://api.mongolab.com/api/1/databases/test_db/collections/Presidents?apiKey=ZijSwGsOeI8F_L2a7TL3UsCRmkWIM-Ek>


Test Factory
------------

It is important to be able to test each module individually.
You should be able to do that without ever referencing 
a controller. Below I show how to proceed.

Here is the Factory that we want to test:

```
angular.module('circleMod', [])
.factory('circleFactory', function() {

    return {
        areaOfCircle : function(radius) {
            return 0;
        },

        circumferenceOfCircle : function(radius) {
            return 1;
        }
    };
});
```

As you can see, the factory creates an object with
two methods. In this case I just give default return
values for the methods.

Here is the test for that factory. There are three
key stages in this test:

1. Create an instance of the module
2. Use the built in Angular $injector class to
retrieve the factory
3. Write your test.

```
describe("circle test", function() {'use strict';

    var circle = null;

	// Step 1: Create Module
    beforeEach(function() {
        module('circleMod');
    });

	// Step 2: Retrieve factory
    beforeEach(inject(function($injector) {
        circle = $injector.get('circleFactory');
    }));

	// Step 3: run Test on a method of the factory
    it("Get Circle area", function() {
        expect(circle.areaOfCircle()).toEqual(0);
    });
});
```
Online
------

###AngularModule

When you are done, enter the URL of your repository. Your work 
should be in a folder called Week10-Module

Start with AngularCalcular from ElfRuble. See also the following 
project that we developed InClass on Nov 25, 2013.

- [AngularFactoryTest](https://github.com/charliecalvert/JsObjects/tree/master/JavaScript/UnitTests/AngularFactoryTest)

Create:

- Music.js

In it, put a module and a factory:

- musicMod
- musicFactory

Create Book.js

In it, put a module and a factory:

- bookMod
- bookFactory

In Music Module, create an array of five musicians and their albums.

```
	[{musician: 'Beatles', album: 'The White Albume'},
	 {musician: ... etc }
	]
```

- getMusicianFromAlbum(albumName)
- getAlbumFromMusician(musicianName)

- In the book module module create an array of books and
authors. If you want, use the filter method shown in 
JavaScript/Design/AngularSearch, or just come up with
your own way to look up the data in the arrays.

In the book module you should have an array of books
and authors, and should define the following methods:

- getAuthorFromBook(bookName)
- getBookFromAuthor(authorName)

Allow the user to view all the albums and books and 
then just type in the name of an album and see 
the musician/author or vice versa.

Write unit tests showing that it all works.

###AngularJson

Start with the JsonFromServer application in ElfRuble.

Same as above, but the data should be defined in a
JSON file. Your index.html should work with real 
data, while TestBooks.js and TestMusic.js should
work with mock data.

Your work should be in a folder called Week10-AngularJson

###AngularMongo

Start with the AngularMongoBootstrapTest from ElfRuble.

Same as above, but the data should be defined in
MongoLab collections. Your index.html should work with real 
data, while TestBooks.js and TestMusic.js should
work with mock data.

Your work should be in a folder called Week10-AngularMongo.

###CraftyNewLevel

In Crafty06 from JsObjects there is some new code that
defines what happens when the player loses. It is interesting
because it shows how to create a new scene. 

You should create a level 2 for your new game. When you define the 
new Level, you will use a similar mechanism to that shown when the 
player loses, but instead of starting a scene that tells the user 
that he or she lost, you start a scene for a new level.

Here is the code for showing that the user lost. First
we define a condition for losing, and then we trigger
a Crafty method that will start the "You Lose" scene.
This code is in ElfGame.js:

```
if (this.misses++ > 3) {
	Crafty.trigger('youLose', Crafty);
}
```

The Crafty trigger method is very much like sending
a broadcast message in Angular. 

Here is the code the **youLose** method:

```
this.bind('youLose', function() {
    Crafty.scene('Failure');
});
```

And here is the new scene:

```
Crafty.scene('Failure', function() { 'use strict';
	// Display some text in celebration of the victory
	Crafty.e('2D, DOM, Text')
		.attr({ x: 0, y: 0 })
		.text('You Lose!')
        .textColor('#FFFFFF')
        .textFont({ size: '48px', weight: 'bold' });


	// restart the game when a key is pressed
	this.restart = function() {
		Crafty.scene('Game');
	};

	// Bind keydown event. This was done wrong in the demo
	this.bind('KeyDown', this.restart);
}, function() { 'use strict';
	// Remove key binding to prevent multiple restarts
	if (!this.unbind('KeyDown', this.restart)) {
		window.alert("Could not unbind");
	}

});
```

See also the notes in Week11 on creating new levels:

[New Levels](http://elvenware.com/charlie/books/CloudNotes/Isit320/Week11.html#predefined-levels)
