Week09-Assignment
=================

The main goal of this assignment is to start using Jade and Stylus in your 
projects. To accomplish this goal, do one of two things:

- Create an [express](http://expressjs.com/) generated application that 
uses [Jade](http://jade-lang.com/) and [Stylus](). Add at least part of your
game to this project. 
- Add Jade and Stylus to your current game/project. You might also try to 
update certain aspects of your server.js file to match the syntax found in 
an autogenerated Express project.

It is actually not difficult to add in the code from an existing autogenerated
Express to your existing project. Or, if that seems overly complex, then take
the other route, and autogenerated the Express project, and then move your
code over to it.

Useful information can be found on the [Week09-Overview](http://www.elvenware.com/charlie/books/CloudNotes/Prog282/Week09.html) page.
Also see these JsObjects projects:

- JsObjects/JavaScript/NodeCode/ExpressUser02
- JsObjects/JavaScript/NodeCode/ExpressUser03

The project your turn in must have a main jade template made from the default
**layout.jade** and **index.jade** or equivalent files that you create 
manually. The following pages should also be defined, and should use 
layout.jade:

- page01.jade
- page02.jade
- page03.jade
- page04.jade

There should be links to all these secondary pages from the main page.
They should include a common **nav** section that is defined in 
**layout.jade**.

Also include a page called **game.html** that contains the current state
of your game or class project. You do not need to include the sign in
page or even your entire game. You can just go directly to your game and or site.

Your project must also have an style.styl file that contains variables and/or
variable arguments

- [Variables](https://github.com/LearnBoost/stylus/blob/master/docs/variables.md)
- [Variable Arguments](https://github.com/LearnBoost/stylus/blob/master/docs/vargs.md)

Turn it in
----------

Put it in your Git Folder as Week09-Site. Provide a link to your
repository.

Hints
-----
As far as this assignment is concerned, the big difference between the previous
versions of Express applications that we have created and this new version 
is the addition of Jade and Stylus. This means that you can, if you want, simply
add in the code for using Jade and Stylus to your existing server.js file. I'm
not sure I have all the steps memorized, but the key additions to your code are
these:

	app.set('views', __dirname + '/views');
	app.set('view engine', 'jade');
	app.use(require('stylus').middleware(__dirname + '/public'));

	
Don't forget, of course, to link in the Stylus and Jade libraries with NPM.

Notes - Looking Ahead
---------------------

If you have any extra time, continue working on getting your game
integrated with CouchDb. We are probably going to focus on using
CouchDb from an Express application. Next week, I'm going to include
this integration of Express with CouchDb as part of the assignment,
so getting some work done in that area is a good idea.



